[THEME MUSIC]
>> REGINA MEREDITH: Rupert
Sheldrake has done more than
nearly any scientists making
the link between science
and the field of
ubiquitous intelligence.
His groundbreaking work was
on the morphogenetic field,
where genetic history is
passed on through a field
of consciousness.
Today, Rupert is speaking about
the effects of having drifted
far away from our
spiritual moorings
into a world of
atheistic materialism,
and he makes the case for
returning to our roots.
Rupert, welcome.
We're so happy to have you here.
Thank you for taking the
tube over to meet us.
>> RUPERT SHELDRAKE:
Good to be here.
Good to be here with you.
>> REGINA: Yes.
It's been a while.
I think we talked about--
it's been about eight years
since I last interviewed you.
And I love your new
work, because it's
bringing a really essential
conversation back.
And I asked you off camera
how the scientific field was
receiving your work and said,
they're primarily ignoring it.
Yet I know many scientists--
I've interviewed many, many
physicists and scientists.
And yet still, even though
they can't talk about it
or acknowledge
your book, there's
this deep yearning for the
magic and mysticism and ethics
of life again.
So tell us what prompted
you to write this book.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, it's
partly that I myself,
being a scientist and also
interested in spiritual
practices, have been thinking
about the connections between
the two for years.
Most of my books are
primarily scientific.
My most recent book before
this, "Science Set Free,"
is about the dogmas of
science and how science
needs to move beyond them.
And so that's about
scientific issues.
And my previous books
are primarily on science.
So this is the first
time I've really tried
to connect these two realms.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: And the reason
it's possible to do it is
because there's now been a
lot of scientific research
on the effects of religious
and spiritual practices.
And on the whole, the great
majority of this research
has shown that people
who do these practices
are happier, healthier,
and even live longer.
So the positive effects of
these practices are very strong.
The other side of the
coin is that if you
don't do these things,
you're unhappier,
you're unhealthier,
and live shorter.
In other words,
militant atheism ought
to come with a health warning.
>> REGINA: Yes, indeed.
In fact, you talk about
that in your book.
And it's interesting because
you've run the gamut.
You started out as an
Anglican private school boy--
well, public school here.
We call it private
school in America--
who had access to a lot of
the magical things of life,
secret gardens, and
so forth Let's talk
about your upbringing
just a little
bit to lay the foundation
because of this whole notion
of coming full circle.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, I was raised
by a loving family who were
committed Christians.
My father was a herbalist
and a pharmacist
and was very
interested in plants.
So I had gardens.
He taught me about
wild flowers and trees.
I kept many, many
different kinds of pets.
My mother was very
supportive, really.
And I went to a boarding school.
And I wanted to do
biology because I wanted
to study animals and plants.
And two things happened.
First of all, I began to notice
that if you study biology
as a science, the first
thing you do with the things
you're studying is kill them.
So biology, which is meant
to be the science of life,
was actually mainly about the
science of dead organisms.
>> REGINA: Yes.
You talked about in that
book the vivisecting
of little animals.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Vivisection is part of it.
Dissection.
You start off with dissection,
then move on to vivisection.
And at the same time,
my science teachers
made it very clear that
science equals atheism.
The scientific worldview,
the mechanistic worldview
has no space for
God or spirit in it.
The whole of nature works
like an automatic machine.
Once it's started
off, it just goes
on and on in much the same way.
And animals and plants are
treated as just machines.
And so where's the spirit,
where is the soul in all that?
Answer?
Nowhere.
So science and the way I was
taught it equaled atheism.
And so because I wanted
to be a scientist,
I sort of accepted
this package deal.
Became an atheist.
>> REGINA: But how was
that for you, really,
on more of an emotional
level, to make--
I mean, was it a simple
leap to become an atheist
after having had a rather
traditional upbringing, where
there were rituals and
things that you actually
believed in that were a part
of the great source of life?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, you see, one
of the things that made it easy
was the fact that the school I
went to, an Anglican boarding
school, the rituals
were compulsory.
We had to go to
chapel every Sunday.
>> REGINA: Ah, yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: I was in the
school choir, the chapel choir.
I loved the music.
I loved the singing.
So becoming an atheism didn't
mean the rituals stopped.
The rituals continued.
>> REGINA: I see, yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: And so I was able
to benefit from them while,
at the same time,
disbelieving in them.
>> REGINA: Interesting, because
you almost have to create
a cognitive dissonance of sorts
as a scientist who still wishes
to maintain some of the
spiritual magic in one's life.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Well, I mean, I just took
it as an aesthetic pleasure.
And actually aesthetics,
the sense of beauty,
is part of the divine
as I now see it.
>> REGINA: Yes.
You became an atheist.
>> SHELDRAKE: I
became an atheist.
Then when I went to Cambridge
as an undergraduate,
I joined the main atheist
society, the Cambridge Humanist
Society.
The trouble is that
after a term or two,
I began to find it
all rather dull.
I mean, people were just sort
of told jokes against religion
and made arguments against,
if Adam and Eve were
created by God, how come
they've got navels in paintings?
You know, that kind of thing.
Almost kind of schoolboy
level atheist arguments.
So it became not very
interesting to me.
And so I got interested
in philosophy.
I was looking for
a deeper meaning,
and I also started looking for
a deeper way of understanding
living organisms, because the
mechanistic theories seemed
to me too limited.
>> REGINA: Well, let's talk
about the philosophical part,
because you started--
you took a little dive
into Freud and Karl Marx
during this era.
>> SHELDRAKE: Oh, well I
started off with the atheist
philosopher.
I mean, I read Freud.
And Freud reinforced
all my atheist views
because he saw religion
as just a projection of--
God's just a projection
of a father figure,
and these are just
basic needs built
into our psyche to provide
us with comfort and illusory
support.
So he was unrelenting in
his dismissal of religion.
And Marx, who had to
view that it was just
a conspiracy of priests
provide the opium of the people
to stop people
revolting and achieving
the dictatorship
of the proletariat.
I quite liked all that.
But again, it began
to seem rather
unsatisfying after a while.
>> REGINA: Well, I
would think it would.
Let's go on to
Sir Julian Huxley.
That was kind of
an interesting--
he was just a little
mention in your book,
but it really takes you
down a rabbit hole that
starts looking frighteningly
like some of what's
happening today, even
almost crossing over
into the transhuman movement.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, Sir Julian
Huxley was the leading secular
humanist of his era.
And he came gave a talk to the
Cambridge Humanist Association.
So I went to it.
He was a famous
evolutionary biologist.
I was doing biology.
And he gave this talk about the
need to enhance the human race.
Basically, the lower
classes are out-breeding
the intelligent classes.
So this would be very bad news
for the future of humanity
because the poor breed
like rabbits and the rich
don't have enough children.
So what we need is to
uplift the human race
through selective breeding
and what we need--
the simple way of doing that
is through sperm donors.
And the ideal sperm
donor should be
a man of distinguished
scientific background, who's
achieved eminence
in public life,
who's preferably an
eminent scientist,
and who is widely recognized and
esteemed for his achievements.
And it turned out the
perfect sperm donor
was Sir Julian Huxley himself.
>> REGINA: His very own self.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
And at first, I
wasn't sure whether he
was serious about this.
But funnily enough,
just a few years ago,
only three or four
years ago, I was
friendly with his
son, Francis Huxley,
who died a little while ago.
And Francis started
getting emails and letters
from people saying that
they'd been doing research
on their ancestry
and they had reason
to believe that their father was
his father, Sir Julian Huxley,
and would he spit into a
test tube for DNA tests
so they could find out--
>> REGINA: Interesting.
How many of these showed up?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, the
thing is, quite a lot.
And Francis was
appalled by this.
He didn't get on
well with his father.
>> REGINA: I just
find this so funny.
I'm sorry.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, he
was so-- so I said to him,
what do you do
with these letters?
>> REGINA: I mean, do you
call them step-siblings?
What do you call
them at that point?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, they would
be half brothers and sisters.
>> REGINA: Exactly.
Yeah.
Right.
Half brothers and sisters.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Maybe dozens of them.
And all of a sudden--
he was over 90 at the time.
The last thing he wanted was
all these people showing up
who claim to have been half
brothers and half sisters.
So I said, what do you
do with these requests?
Have you spat into a test
tube for the DNA test?
He said, of course not.
I said, what do you
do with the requests?
I just throw the letters into
the wastepaper basket, he said.
>> REGINA: Oh my God.
Well, that experiment
ended poorly for him,
but I suppose his
father would have
been proud to have had so many
essential clones of himself
out there.
>> SHELDRAKE: With enough
scientific curiosity to find
out who their father was, yes.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Interesting.
OK.
So now let's talk
about your transition
away from this phase
of your education.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, I think the
first thing that happened was
that I began to find the machine
theory of life inadequate
for understanding
living organisms.
And I then discovered a
holistic approach to science
through reading the works of
the German poet Goethe, who
in the beginning of the
19th century, around 1800,
was trying to find a more
holistic approach to nature,
where you could base
your understanding
not just on breaking
things down into bits,
but seeing them as a whole
and literally seeing things.
One of the things he did was
looked at plants in detail
and found that you could
find transitional forms
between leaves and sepals and
sepals and petals and petals
and stamens.
And he had the idea
that these were
all morphing of an underlying
leaf type structure that
could change into
these other organs
and that you could actually
see by looking at them how
one form changed into another.
And that was looking at
forms and understanding forms
by direct experience, rather
than grinding everything up
and analyzing the
chemicals inside it,
which was the usual approach.
So that pointed me towards
a more holistic way
of seeing things.
And I didn't want to go
on doing science to--
I mean, I did very
well at Cambridge.
I got a double first.
I got college prizes.
I got university botany prize.
You know, I was the--
scientific researchers
wanted me to work with them,
but I didn't want to
do a PhD straightaway.
I wanted to sort of--
is this what I
really want to do?
So I was lucky.
I got a fellowship at Harvard,
called a Frank Knox Fellowship,
which gave me a blissfully
free year at Harvard, where
I studied history and
philosophy of science
to get a big picture.
And this was a long time ago.
This was soon after Thomas
Kuhn's famous book had just
been published, "The Structure
of Scientific Revolutions",
where he introduced the idea of
paradigms and paradigm shifts.
I mean, it's now a cliche, but
he published the book in 1962.
I was at Harvard in 1963.
So this was the latest thing.
Only people in philosophy
of science knew about it.
It hadn't reached
popular culture.
And I was blown
away by this book
because what it showed was
that the way science is thought
of at any given time
is not the truth, which
is what I'd been led
to believe it was,
it's a model of reality.
And these models can change.
And the history of science
has plenty of examples
of these models changing.
So I suddenly thought, wow,
well, this machine theory
of life that
dominates everything
isn't the only way of looking at
it, and the model could change.
A new kind of biology
might be possible.
This gave me tremendous
sense of hope for the future,
that science didn't
have to remain locked
into this atheistic,
materialist, narrow,
it's all just the
molecules, the mind's
just the brain point of view.
It could be
interestingly broader.
But I didn't see
how to go there.
I didn't know how to
move in that direction.
But at least it gave me
the hope it was worth--
>> REGINA: Well,
it's interesting
because you're dealing
with institutions.
At that time you were
dealing with institutions.
So you're talking about
funding and tenure
and all these sorts
of things that
are threatened by new ideas.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Well, at that stage, in
my particular position,
the only way forward to remain
in institutional science
was to do a PhD, which
I went back to Cambridge
and did on plant development.
And I worked an area where
I could think holistically.
I worked on plants
because I'd had
enough experience of working
on animals to realize
that a scientific career
working on animals
involves killing animals
on an industrial scale,
and I didn't want to spend
my career killing animals.
I went into biology because
I loved animals and kept them
and had pets I was
really fond of.
So plants seemed to me--
I mean, it does
involve killing plants,
but I didn't feel
too bad about that.
I mean, even
vegetarians eat lettuce
and that's a living
leaf and so on.
Anyway.
I felt OK about doing
research on plants.
I had a great time in
Cambridge doing this.
And while I was a graduate
student at Cambridge,
I met a very eccentric group
of philosophers, called
the Epiphany Philosophers,
who had some very high powered
philosophers in it-- the
professor of philosophy
at Cambridge, a woman
called Dorothy Emmet
who was professor of
philosophy at Manchester, who'd
studied with Whitehead, the
great holistic philosopher,
quantum physicists, some
Buddhists, some people
into tai chi.
And this group was
basically Anglican--
contained some Quakers as well,
but also Buddhists and holistic
medicine and so on--
and was exploring a way
forward for science.
And everyone in the group
was influenced by Kuhn's idea
of a paradigm shift.
What would be the
next paradigm shift?
>> REGINA: How fortunate
you found this group.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
I was incredibly fortunate to
find because nobody else was
talking about these things.
And so I was in this group.
And we had four retreats a year.
We lived in a windmill
on the coast of Norfolk,
a place called Burnham Overy
Staithe, as a community.
So for a week we all
lived as a community.
We ate together.
We had a rota to cook
and wash up and things.
Every morning we had a
seminar on some topic.
Sometimes people
like Arthur Koestler
came for these seminars.
Sometimes holistically minded
writers and philosophers.
Mostly it was among ourselves.
The implications
of quantum theory.
The nature of consciousness,
the possibility
of a holistic biology,
the limitations of the DNA
approach to life, and so on.
This was amazing
to be part of it.
>> REGINA: It
sounds like heaven.
>> SHELDRAKE: It was.
It was hard hitting, though.
I mean, these discussions
were very, very hard hitting.
There was no nonsense tolerated,
and people were often reduced
to tears in these discussions.
But because it was a
religious type community,
I wasn't really into
that side of it,
but we had every morning,
before the day began,
we did the Anglican
matins service
and in the evening
the evensong service,
chanting, in
plainsong, the psalms.
And each day began
with something
called the Chapter of Faults.
And we were all in these
white robes in the top floor
of the windmill in a circle.
And one by one, starting
with the oldest,
we had to go round and
confess to the group things
that we'd done that
would have upset people.
It wasn't like deep,
existential faults.
It was not doing your
share of the washing
up, that kind of thing.
>> REGINA: So ideally within
the community in the last week
or 24 hours, not your
deeply held secrets.
>> SHELDRAKE: No, nothing--
no, no, no, not
deeply held secrets.
Just things that
might have upset
other people in the community.
And first you confessed these
things, then you had to say,
if anyone has anything
else to remind me of,
I'd be grateful to be told.
And because this was a
somewhat argumentative group,
quite often people did say
things that had upset them.
And what this did
was cleared the air,
and then we all sang
together after this.
And it sort of meant that
this rather cantankerous group
of people, very argumentative,
could come together every day
and start each day afresh.
And if you did have
any grudge or upset,
you could bring it out then.
So this actually
worked very well.
>> REGINA: Yes.
In this period of time, what
really came to the fore for you
as a young man?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well,
at this stage,
the spiritual side
wasn't the main thing.
What came to the fore for me
was the idea that consciousness
wasn't explained by
science, that quantum theory
had completely broken with the
old mechanical view of nature,
and determinism
was part of nature.
There was an involvement
of consciousness in science
itself.
You can't have observations
without an observer.
The mind is involved
in producing science.
And our mental models are
what underlies science.
It's not reality itself
that we're seeing.
We're seeing our models of
reality, and those change.
And this encouraged
me to think there
could be a more holistic
view in biology,
which would also include a
more holistic view of medicine.
Instead of medicine just
being about surgery and drugs,
it could include consciousness,
expectation, belief, and what's
now called the placebo effect.
All these things were
important ingredients.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Now this is a bit
of a non-sequitur,
but as I'm listening to you
and thinking of Goethe and so
forth, my mind wanders
quite naturally
to Rudolf Steiner and a lot
of what he brought forward
by way of a system.
Any quick comments you
might have before we
start moving on to India?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, Steiner
was a follower of Goethe,
and many of the things I found
interesting in Goethe were also
things that Steiner
found interesting.
I didn't know about
Steiner at that stage,
or only vaguely heard of him.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: So I didn't get
these ideas through Steiner.
I got them through
Goethe himself.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: I
later discovered,
not in that phase as a
graduate student at Cambridge,
but later, people said, did
you know there's this whole
movement following Steiner, and
they look at plants in a way
that is holistic
following Goethe?
And they even have
schools where they
teach science in a
much more holistic way,
Waldorf or Steiner schools.
I didn't know anything
about that at that stage.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Thank you.
OK.
Let's take your life
forward to India,
where you spent a
number of years.
And then where you met a
Sufi mystic and the thing
he said to you
that really started
shifting things for you.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, I
went to India twice.
In 1968 I got a
Royal Society grant
to study tropical
rainforest plants
at the University of Malaya
in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia.
And they gave me one of
those old style airline
tickets where you could break
the journey as often as you
liked.
So I decided, well, instead
of just flying over India,
I'll get off in India and
just taste a bit of India
on the way.
I'd only been there two
or three days in Delhi
when I ran into, by chance, the
one person I knew in India, who
was a graduate student
friend from Cambridge, who
was an anthropologist
living with a family
in a remote village
in the Himalayas.
And he said, would
you like to come?
I'm going back tomorrow.
Would you like to come
to my village with me?
So I said, yes.
So I went to the British Airways
office, changed my ticket.
And I was plunged
into rural Indian life
in a village which
didn't have electricity.
And of course, no radio or TV.
And I was living in a
kind of medieval world.
It was fascinating.
And here were people
of great faith.
I met this guru.
We went for a walk
along the valley,
and I saw this orange clad
figure sitting in a cave.
And I said to my friend,
Johnny, who's that?
And he said, oh, he's
the local holy man.
I hadn't heard of
sadhus and holy men.
I'd only been in India
three or four days.
And there I was in the
heart of rural India.
And the sadhu beckoned us,
and we sat down in the cave.
And then he offered
me-- he'd got this clay
pipe, smoke coming out.
I didn't know what it was.
And he said, would you like to
try some of Shiva's holy plant?
So I said, well, why not.
Here I am in India.
Have a few puffs of this.
And it was an incredibly
strong cannabis thing.
I'd never had cannabis before.
And he started with a prayer
for the Enlightenment of the God
on the smoke.
So it was a kind of
spiritual practice.
It wasn't just smoking
a joint at a party.
It was completely different.
And I felt completely different.
When I walked out of the
cave into the sunlight,
there were the Himalayas.
There were these green-- here
was the green hills, the river.
I was in a state of bliss
that I'd never known before.
I though, this is incredible.
I felt really home,
really connected,
and as if a vast new world
was opening up for me.
And so I spent another two
or three months in India,
and I was very, very
impressed by it.
A whole civilisation based on--
everyone there had a kind
of spiritual dimension.
Then I got to Sri Lanka.
And I visited a
Buddhist monastery
and talked to some monks.
And they told me
about meditation.
Then I finally got to Malaysia,
and I had a marvelous time
studying rainforest
plants and being embedded
in this very exotic culture.
At that time, the
lowland rainforest jungle
came up within 10
miles of Kuala Lumpur.
You could be in primal
rainforest within half an hour
from the university.
Now, of course, that's
all been cleared
and development and
so on has taken over.
But this was a complete eye
opener for me-- biologically,
to be in the middle of
a rainforest, tropical
environment; culturally,
to be exposed
to Hinduism, Buddhism
in Sri Lanka,
and then in Malaysia,
Islam, where most people are
Muslim, and Chinese.
There were many Chinese
there so we came
across Taoism and Confucianism.
And I met tribal people
because they worked with us
on our botanical expeditions.
So this was a tremendously
mind opening experience,
followed by traveling in
Thailand and Cambodia and Laos.
And this was before they got
engulfed in the Vietnam War.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> SHELDRAKE: So I
went back to Cambridge.
I had several more years there
doing research on plants.
But I then came to a point
where I had to decide,
do I want to go down a
regular academic track,
leading to being a professor
and all that kind of thing,
which I could have done,
or do something different?
And I felt so drawn
to India and I
felt so drawn to
working holistically
with plants that
an opportunity came
to work at a new
international institute
starting in India for
agricultural research,
called Icrisat, where I got
a job as the principal plant
physiologist.
I then had, from then on,
about seven years in India,
where I was working in the
fields on crop improvement,
doing useful work with
Indian colleagues,
mainly, but international
scientists as well.
Immersed in this totally
fascinating culture.
>> REGINA: I have to say, just
a quick interjection here.
I spent a little time in India
and I flew back into Heathrow.
But when I flew back
in after experiencing
all the flavor and lushness and
sensuality and color and spices
and flew back into a world where
the men were all wearing gray,
gray, black, or navy blue,
and the women weren't
a lot more colorful, it was
one of those real shocks
as to what has happened
to us in Western culture.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, yes.
Well, I felt that.
I felt here's this amazingly
exotic, colorful world, which
is informed by a
sense of the spirit,
with amazing
traditions, cultures,
astonishing art, amazing
music, wonderful smells.
I mean, it's just marvelous.
>> REGINA: I can understand why
you went back for seven years.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: And I had
to job I loved doing,
real science that
could be useful.
By that stage I'd come up,
while I was at Cambridge,
with my idea about
morphogenetic fields
and morphic resonance,
memory in nature,
which was a very
heretical idea in science.
And I didn't feel I could
publish it until I'd
thought about it a lot more.
I knew it would be
very controversial.
So in India, working
on practical problems,
was a way of stepping back,
continuing to think about this.
Still doing science
but not having
to confront a kind
of clash of cultures
when I wasn't ready
to do that, when
I hadn't thought it through.
So in my spare
time I was thinking
about morphogenetic
fields, form shaping
fields, morphic resonance,
the memory in nature,
inheritance through
morphic resonance,
as well as through genes.
And then in India, I was
also, at the same time,
by then I'd taken up
transcendental meditation,
because I wanted to
explore consciousness.
Having gone through
a psychedelic phase
at Cambridge, which
shocked me out
of my complacency about the
mind being just the brain
and there were dimensions
of consciousness
no one had ever told me
about it in any tradition.
I mean, I hadn't
heard about this
in regular Christian tradition.
I hadn't heard about this
in the scientific tradition.
The only guides were people
like Aldous Huxley, who'd had--
his books on masculine and
the spiritual dimensions
of psychedelic experience.
>> REGINA: And I suppose some
of the old Catholic mystics--
Eckhart, Hildegard von Bingen--
that had these experiences
and people still
try to guess whether or not
they were plant induced or not.
But other than that, there
was nothing in religion
that led us to understand
these dimensions of experience.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, exactly.
And in any case, at that
stage I was still more
or less atheistic,
and I didn't know
about the Christian
mystical tradition.
No one had ever
told me about it.
So I took up
transcendental meditation
because I wanted to explore
consciousness without drugs.
And I found it a very
helpful practice.
And the way it
was put across was
you don't need to
believe anything.
Just try it and
see what happens.
That was fine.
And I liked the
experimental approach.
And I also went to visit
Hindu temples and ashrams
and had got interested in
Hindu philosophy, which
has consciousness is
primary and sees this
as working through nature.
And I loved the fact they
had all these sacred trees
and animals and things.
There was a sense that
life wasn't just machinery.
At that stage, when I
was living in Hyderabad,
I was learning Urdu, because
that was the main lingua
franca of Hyderabad.
And I was very friendly
with a Muslim family who
I got on terribly well with.
And the grandfather
of that family,
a friend, his grandfather
was a Sufi teacher.
And he had a big
influence on me.
He was called [INAUDIBLE],,
and he spoke English.
He wore wonderful brocade robes.
He was very aesthetic.
He had perfumes.
And men in that
culture wear perfumes.
And when they get
together they're
wearing these marvelous
robes, and they're
smelling each other's
perfumes and stuff.
I mean, I hadn't come across
anything like that before.
And these are religious people.
So pleasure was, in their view
of the world, given by God.
It wasn't sinful or bad to
have things that were beautiful
or enjoy the pleasures of life.
They saw them as
gifts of God, and they
were grateful for them.
And I thought this
was much healthier
than the more puritanical
attitudes I was used to.
Anyway, he gave me a
Sufi form of meditation,
which I did for a year or so.
And I found that
really helpful too.
And I felt a connection
with the Islamic world
which I hadn't had before.
But then as I continued
my exploration,
this new thought
crossed my mind.
What about Christianity?
The one thing I had
not considered--
>> REGINA: Your
very original roots.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
My original roots.
I later discovered this
is a very common factor
in our whole society today.
I mean, it's what I
call the ABC principle.
Anything But Christian.
Buddhism Lite is fine.
A bit of a Native American
shamanism, Peruvian drumming,
as long as it's not Christian.
Anyway I was in the ABC
mentality at the time.
And then I started
trying to reconnect
with the Christian
tradition, and I found it
really helpful to feel
in harmony with my roots
and getting more into
contact with my ancestors
and the tradition
from which I'd come.
But I found that that
was still rather limited,
and it didn't take into account
the great philosophical depths
of Hinduism or insights into
consciousness of Buddhism.
I just went to regular
Anglican church services.
And I found I loved the
singing, I loved the music,
I was used to it, but it didn't
have this mystical dimension.
And at that stage, a
friend introduced me
to an English
Benedictine monk called
Father Bede Griffiths, who lived
in an ashram in South India.
I went to visit him.
And this was, for me, the
moment of great revelation.
He didn't reject all
these Hindu and Buddhists
and he accepted them.
He thought they were great
insights into the nature
of ultimate reality.
But he also was very
aware of Meister Eckhart
and the whole Christian
mystical tradition,
which he told me about and
I'd never heard about before,
and had produced a
kind of integration
of these traditions, which was
just the perfect thing for me.
So when I came to write my
book on morphic resonance
a couple of years
later, he said, well,
if you want to stay in
India to write your book,
just come and live in the
ashram as long as you like.
So I did.
And so I spent two years in
this ashram writing my book,
"A New Science of
Life," my first book.
>> REGINA: That's wonderful.
And you had contact
with him the whole time?
>> SHELDRAKE: I
saw him every day.
Yes.
>> REGINA: Every day.
>> SHELDRAKE: I mean, it
was a small community.
>> REGINA: What a privilege.
>> SHELDRAKE: Hindu ashrams
in India were overwhelmed with
Western visitors.
I mean, the Sai Baba
ashram, for example,
would have like 1,000
Westerners at any given time.
>> REGINA: Well, The Beatles
had already done their thing.
Yeah.
Right
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
>> REGINA: So yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: So the Hindu
ashrams were all crowded with
spiritual tourists.
Bus loads of Italians
arriving every day and things.
But a Christian ashram,
because most people
worked on the anything but
Christian principle, most
Westerners, the last
thing they thought of--
>> REGINA: Was peaceful.
>> SHELDRAKE: --was going
to a Christian ashram.
Most of the people there
were Indian Christians.
It was actually ironically more
Indian than the Indian ashrams,
the Hindu ashrams--
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> SHELDRAKE: --and smaller
and much more peaceful.
So at any given time there'd
only about 30 or 40 people
there.
And I saw Father Bede every day.
And as I wrote my book, I
wrote it with a fountain pen
in exercise books.
And he read it
chapter by chapter,
and we had long discussions
about everything.
>> REGINA: What a
lovely collaboration.
That's beautiful.
>> SHELDRAKE: It was fantastic.
Although he didn't
know much science,
he knew a lot about philosophy.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> SHELDRAKE: And when I had
to explain the science to me,
he'd say, Rupert, what
is a magnetic field,
and how does it work?
Then I had to give
these kind of tutorials
to this great sage on
elementary science.
Very, very bright but he hadn't
had a scientific background.
And this was wonderfully
good practice
in explaining scientific
ideas to someone who
was clever, but not scientific.
>> REGINA: Right.
Well, I've said
off camera, you've
had to me what
sounds to me to be
such a beautiful, charmed life.
And you've been able to
experience and indulge
in all of the things.
Anywhere your curiosity
could take you,
you've had just these exemplary
experiences, such as what
you just spoke about.
And now what I'd like to do
is after that, after you began
expanding your own
base of awareness,
after you went
back the ABC thing,
went back and started
also expressing yourself
through song and such through
your Anglican tradition,
you've moved forward to
a time where now you're
blending the two in
this newest book, right?
And I think what's fascinating
about it is because we're still
in the ABC mode, big time.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
>> REGINA: And
let's do some stats.
We'll go from all this lush
imagery in India to some stats.
And you talk about in your
book, today only 5% of Brits
attend church regularly.
Well, you go through
every village,
you have these wonderful
little churches and chapels,
and you still have
the bells ringing
but nobody's showing up.
Right?
And that's for church itself.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
>> REGINA: And the stats are
18% in formerly Catholic Irish
Republic, 5% in France, and I
don't know that our viewership
would be totally shocked to
find one of the higher rates
of Christian attendance
in church is America.
>> SHELDRAKE: Much higher
than anywhere in Europe,
except Poland.
>> REGINA: Yes.
I mean, Europe is a
post-Christian block of nations
now.
Right.
And so with atheism and
science as the masters,
as the, essentially,
rulers philosophically,
there are some shifts that
have occurred in society
that are significant.
And there are some things
that have been lost.
And it doesn't
matter whether it's
Christianity or any
religion, I mean,
really, it's the spiritual
principles we're talking about.
If they're not being employed
in the culture at large,
you have an issue of
ethics and morality
and such that
starts taking a hit.
Let's talk about
that for a moment.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, I think
what's happened, basically,
is the ruling philosophy
of post-Christian Europe,
has become secular humanism.
And secular humanism
is quite interesting
because it is a kind
of religion in itself.
Although most secular humanists
would call themselves atheists,
they don't believe
in the Christian God,
but the structure of secular
humanism, and indeed,
its morality, is very
similar to Christianity.
Basically, what they've
done is got rid of God
and made humanity God.
So it's like Christianity
where humans become divine.
And that's why secular
humanism in some ways
is even more vigorous in its
assertions of human rights
and, say, opposition
to the death penalty,
including everyone,
previously rejected groups
like gays and
transsexuals, et cetera.
Everyone has to be included
because they're human.
>> REGINA: Yes.
That's true.
Very inclusive.
>> SHELDRAKE: It has
great strengths, I think.
I didn't see this
completely clearly
until I read recently Yuval
Noah Hararos book "Homo
Deus," which is a big
bestseller here in Britain.
Probably in America too.
He makes it very
clear that that is
the religion of
the modern secular
world, secular humanism.
Now if you take a really
thoroughgoing atheistic view
it's deeply depressing.
Life is totally pointless.
Everything stops it death.
The universe is purposeless
and has no meaning.
There's no reason you
should be nice to anyone
other than kind of just a
kind of social convention.
We agree that I don't want
you to steal my things,
we don't want our things
stolen, so we get together
to have police forces to
stop people stealing things.
But that's a kind of
minimalist morality.
It doesn't say you could
go out of your way to help
the poor and the downtrodden.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And that's the point
I'm trying to make here,
is that once families,
the family structure,
started also shifting
dramatically after the 1960s.
You know, divorce was
hugely on the rise.
Many people, certainly the
millennials from single parent
families and so forth,
and the dropping
away of the religions of
the world, so to speak,
that is not a conscious
type of secular humanism.
That's just a
dropping away of what
was, with the majority of people
left with nothing in its place.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Well, that's the thing, you see.
All religions provide a range
of spiritual practices--
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> SHELDRAKE: --which is
what I've been writing about.
Meditation is one that's
in all traditions.
The Christian version
is contemplative prayer.
But all have singing
and chanting.
So you sing and chant
with other people.
And this has scientifically
proven effects
on making you feel better,
more interconnected,
lowering stress, and so forth.
If you just go to church,
you get to sing just
by going to church.
It's just part of what you do.
Then there's the
observation of festivals
throughout the year, which gives
meaning to life and structure
to community.
Then there's the emphasis on
helping other people, which
all religions encourage.
It's not just about me
and me getting ahead.
It's about helping others.
It's a key part
of all religions.
And then there's
the, again, going
to sacred places and the sense
of continuity and tradition
and the sacrinization
of the Earth.
In many traditions, including
the Christian tradition,
there's pilgrimage, where
you go to holy places.
Now if you opt out
of religion-- say
I've left all that behind me.
I rebelled against that.
A lot of people think
they've outgrown it,
or some people have had
really bad experiences,
and that's more understandable.
Other people just
feel, oh, I'm so smart,
I don't need all that.
I've seen through it.
>> REGINA: Right.
>> SHELDRAKE: Stop doing it.
Then you're left
much more isolated
with none of these practices
as part of your life.
And you can, of course, then
get them back, one by one.
But it's more effort.
And indeed, many people have
a spiritual but not religious.
>> REGINA: Well, there's a
huge rise in spirituality.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes, that's it.
>> REGINA: And seeking for a
spiritual path of some kind,
yes, because of the void.
>> SHELDRAKE:
Because of this void.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: So if you
stop following a traditional
religious path, which
many people have,
even in the United States but
not so many as in Europe--
Europe's sort of way ahead of
the US in this particular--
>> REGINA: What about Italy?
I didn't see any
numbers for Italy.
Do you know any off
the top of your head?
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
It's about 15%
church attendance.
>> REGINA: Wow.
15%.
>> SHELDRAKE: I mean,
it's more than England,
but still it's a minority.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: I mean, the
highest in Europe is Poland.
It's the most religious
country in Europe.
>> REGINA: And as I recall,
is that in the 30s or 40s?
>> SHELDRAKE: It's about 40%.
>> REGINA: 40%.
>> SHELDRAKE: The US
is about nearer 50%.
>> REGINA: Oh, interesting.
It's gone up since those stats.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, there
are different stats.
There's 45% to 50%.
They vary, you know.
None of these
stats are absolute.
>> REGINA: Well,
it's on the rise.
>> SHELDRAKE: I don't
know if it's on the rise.
I would say it's on the fall
in places like the Bay Area
and New York.
>> REGINA: But not in what we
call the middle of the country,
the Midwest, the red
states, so to speak.
It's more on the rise it appears
now, especially fundamentalism.
>> SHELDRAKE: But for people
who've given up regular
religious practice of
the ancestral kind,
ones that the family had-- and
this mainly means Christians,
because you don't meet many
atheist or agnostic Hindus,
Buddhists, or Muslims.
Christianity is the religion
that most, on the largest
scale, has led to atheism.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: So almost
all atheists are Jewish
or Christian, principally
Christian, by background.
So having moved away
from that, then there's
a spiritual hunger and need.
And that's why there's
an enormous interest
in spirituality
today of all sorts,
because it's a
basic human desire.
We need to feel
connected with something
larger than ourselves, which is
what spirituality is all about.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And you've done a
beautiful job chronicling
each of these needs.
And you go into
them in some detail.
And what I like
about the book too,
is you have a little
practices that people can
do at the end of the chapters.
And I just wanted to put one--
just add one comment in here.
I'll read from your book.
And this was a comment by Alain
de Botton, the philosopher,
who was a former atheist.
And he came to a conclusion.
And this was what
the statement was,
that "we've grown frightened
of the word morality.
We bridle at the thought
of hearing a sermon.
We flee from the idea that
art should be uplifting
or have ethical mission.
We don't go on pilgrimages.
We can't build temples.
We have no mechanism for
expressing gratitude."
Which essentially
your book covered
every one of those things
that he talked about.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Well, exactly.
Well, he's still an atheist.
But he wrote that in a book
called "Religion for Atheists,"
where he's trying to reinvent
religion for atheists.
He's started atheist
sermons in London,
for example, which what he says
is a sermon is a talk designed
to help you lead a better life.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: In
a secular world,
all you have is information.
You can't tell people
how to lead a better
life because you're
interfering with their freedom.
So secular societies have
nothing like a sermon.
So he's re-instituted sermons--
>> REGINA: Interesting.
>> SHELDRAKE: --about how
to lead a better life.
>> REGINA: Is he part
of the Sunday Assembly?
>> SHELDRAKE: No, but he's very
close in spirit to the Sunday
Assembly.
>> REGINA: Because the Sunday
Assembly is a group of atheists
that essentially--
I think their motto is "Live
better, help often, wonder
more."
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
Well, they've sort of
invented an atheist church.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: And they've
got over 70 branches.
And they meet on Sunday
morning, sing together,
have uplifting stories.
And in fact, they don't like
being called an atheist church
anymore.
They prefer to be called
mystical humanists.
They're reinventing
a kind of something
beyond themselves, really.
>> REGINA: That's fascinating.
Now, we talk about what-- let's
talk about some of the things--
we have a little
time left here, so we
can get into some of the
principles you talk about.
And one of them, of course,
is prayer, meditation.
And you say, when
we're participating
in a prayer or meditation,
we have two kinds--
intentions and
requests or letting go.
And let's talk about the
value of each of those.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, I make
a distinction between prayer
and meditation.
And by prayer, I'm talking about
petitionary prayer, the kind
that's asking for things.
>> REGINA: Please,
please, please.
Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
So I see the difference
between these two
as like the difference between
breathing out and breathing in.
I think they're both important,
but they're quite different.
And I do both myself.
I meditate in the mornings
and I pray in the evenings.
Now, in meditation, what
you're doing is usually closing
your eyes, withdrawing from
the concerns of the world,
you're in a quiet place.
And then through a
mantra or through
a mindfulness technique,
allowing the stream of thought
to carry on but try and detach
from it by going to the mantra
or to the awareness
of the breathing.
And so the thoughts
continue, like clouds
going through the
sky, but you're not
as involved with them.
Sometimes they
stop, and then you
are in a period of mindfulness
or open consciousness, which
is no longer about thoughts,
worries, preoccupations,
ruminations.
And so what you're
doing there is trying
to let go of thoughts
and your regular concerns
and your regular
involvements with the world
and detach yourself
from it to go
to the very ground of
consciousness itself,
which turns out to be
enormously relaxing, connecting,
and powerfully healthy.
>> REGINA: Indeed.
And you can have incredible
breakthrough insights
from that place.
>> SHELDRAKE: Exactly.
>> REGINA: When the mind is
completely still and relaxed
and unperturbed.
>> SHELDRAKE: Exactly.
But it comes by itself.
You can't--
>> REGINA: Yes.
You cannot force it.
>> SHELDRAKE: However hard
you try, you can't force it.
Now, petitionary prayer,
asking for things,
it works in exactly
the opposite direction.
That's like withdrawing from
the outer world coming in,
like breathing in.
In petitionary prayer, you
start by making a connection
with a spiritual realm or being.
Petitionary prayers
start with an invocation,
"Our Father, who art in Heaven,"
"Hail Mary, full of grace,"
[HINDU] for a Hindu invocation.
You start by invoking the
being to which you're praying.
So you connect with
the spiritual realm,
and then you link it to
what you're concerned
about in the outer world.
Someone who's sick that
you're praying for.
Something you are frightened
of that you want help with.
Something that you want a
sense of purpose or meaning
in your life.
You want the grace to be
able to forgive somebody.
Whatever you are asking for, for
other people or for yourself,
is connecting the
spiritual realm
with the concerns of
your everyday life.
So it's like the
opposite direction.
It's from the spirit
outwards, and the other's
from outwards to the spirit.
>> REGINA: And for you, the
balance of the two is what
works best?
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes, because I
think just meditation, you see,
leaves unaddressed the
concerns of everyday life.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: Each of us,
by the end of the day,
I've got things that
I want to pray about,
about what's happened.
I want to give thanks for
things that have happened.
I want to pray for people
I know who are sick
or who are in trouble.
>> REGINA: Yes.
And that's another big one
we're going to go to next,
is gratitude.
But before we do, I wanted
to say, you share in the book
that dozens of
members of parliament
have begun meditating.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
There's over 100.
>> REGINA: I think that's
absolutely fascinating.
I mean, if there were ever
a stressful, left-brained
environment.
And that's wonderful.
How was that spearheaded?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, there are
people who teach meditation who
hit on the idea of inviting
members of Parliament to go
to meditation courses or classes
in the houses of Parliament.
>> REGINA: That's lovely.
>> SHELDRAKE: And then having
a regular group meeting where
they can go and
meditate together.
>> REGINA: Maybe they'll find
higher purpose in their work
that way too.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well,
they may well.
I mean, they'd
certainly find a relief
from the stress and
a kind of window
into a more calm state of being.
>> REGINA: Yes.
A calm state of being where you
can make decisions in a clear
headed state too.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
>> REGINA: And then, also, the
National Health Service here is
now recommending meditation.
Of course, it's going to
keep the budget intact
if you have people
remaining calm and healthy.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, exactly.
It's mainly recommended for
people with mild to moderate
depression.
And this is a huge problem here
as it is in the United States.
Depression is endemic.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: And I don't think
it's surprising it's endemic
in a society where people
feel isolated and think
they're leading pointless
lives in a pointless world.
I mean, it's a modern disease.
And it turns out
that meditation can
be as effective, if not
more effective and certainly
cheaper, than
antidepressants like Prozac.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: So this is now--
they actually did
clinical trials,
comparing meditation
with antidepressants,
to see which worked best.
And in many ways, the
meditation worked better.
And of course, has
fewer side effects.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Absolutely.
Let's talk about-- let's
move on to gratitude.
And one of the things
I love in the book
is you talk about,
let's start with some
of the really essential elements
of life, like the sun itself.
How many cultures, how
many people-- the Brits,
in particular, worship the sun.
And the notion of something
brilliant and life
giving and multi-dimensional.
So that's where we can begin
gratitude on a daily basis.
And from there, your
practice of gratitude.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, mine
has different levels.
I mean, part of
it is the simplest
and most straightforward form of
gratitude are for other people,
because we all depend
on other people.
And then as we move out from the
other people on whom we depend,
people who grow our
food, bring it to us,
help us in our lives--
doctors, dentists,
bus drivers, maintenance
engineers, teachers.
I mean, there's so many
people we depend on.
That's one level.
Then there's the
ecology that gives rise
to the food and our life and
the Earth, the whole Earth
on which all of us depend.
And I think if we
take it for granted,
then we run into real danger.
The ecological crisis
is based on just
taking the Earth for granted.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: We take
but we don't give,
even don't give thanks.
But then the sun,
you see, the Earth
itself is part of a much larger
system, the solar system,
and that's part of the galaxy.
So I mean, the sun, if the
sun sends out a coronal mass
ejection pointed
towards the Earth,
it could take out all
our communication systems
in no time at all.
And so we take for
granted the sun.
And the sun is like
a living organism.
It has constant activity.
That's why NASA
has a space weather
forecast, because the sun's
activity affects life on Earth.
It's not just a standard
emitter like a light bulb or--
>> REGINA: Exactly.
>> SHELDRAKE:
--uniform radiation.
>> REGINA: And it's always been
believed by ancient cultures
to have its own intelligence of
a vast multi-dimensional nature
that it's sharing
and perpetuating.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, exactly.
And I learned this--
well, I never learned it
from anyone in England.
But when I was in India,
when I learned yoga,
one of the things that I
learned was Surya Namaskar,
prostration to the sun.
It's a basic yoga exercise.
I've done it every day
for more than 40 years.
I did it this morning
when I got up.
And that's an
acknowledgement to the sun.
On one level, it's a
really good exercise.
Another level,
you're facing the sun
or facing a window where
the sunlight is coming in
and acknowledging the sun on
which all our lives depend.
>> REGINA: Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: Another Hindu
practice is one of the most
common of all their mantras,
is the Gaia Tree Mantra,
which is a mantra which
asks the sun to illuminate
our meditation, the glorious
divine splendor of the sun
to illuminate our meditation.
>> REGINA: Yes.
Absolutely.
And I'm really glad
you wrote about that
because that's something
that's been fairly lost
in Western culture.
Let's talk about beauty
for beauty's sake too.
This is something I
feel very strongly.
About our sense
of innate beauty,
it doesn't matter which of the
senses it's running through,
has been fairly well obscured
as a result of using devices.
We're not connected with the
sensual world as much anymore.
We've had so much fun
talking to this point.
So let's for a moment
just address the nature
the nature of beauty
itself for beauty's sake.
>> SHELDRAKE: I think when
we think about beauty,
the first idea that most people
have is it's just in our minds
and it's not really out there.
It's just in our minds.
But if you think
about it, it soon
becomes clear that it's
much more than that.
Animals have a sense of beauty.
I mean, think of
a peacock's tail,
think of a butterfly's wing.
Why are they so beautiful?
That's because
they are to attract
other members of the species.
They have a function, "the
beauty of sexual selection,"
as Darwin said.
But they wouldn't work unless
they had a sense of beauty.
And flowers are some of the
most beautiful things on Earth.
And again, as Darwin
said, "Before there
was an eye to see it there
could have been no flower."
There are interactions
between the plant
kingdom and the animal kingdom.
But they were there
70 million years ago,
long before any humans appeared.
And it was insect eyes that were
seeing the flowers, butterflies
and bees primarily.
They've evolved in
relation to insects.
And unless those insects
had a sense of beauty
with brains tiny--
really tiny brains, much,
much smaller than ours--
an exquisite sense
of beauty that
has driven the
evolution of flies,
then this shows that
a sense of beauty
is inherent in almost
anything, even in plants.
Fern leaves, for example, are
extraordinarily beautiful,
and that's nothing to do
with attracting insects.
It's just somehow
in nature itself.
There's hardly anything
ugly in nature itself.
Most ugly things we
see are man made.
>> REGINA: Absolutely.
And yet we have cut
ourselves off from a lot
of the innate beauty
surrounding us.
We walk right by a beautiful
rose on the walkway,
for example.
This is something that
I have a hard time with,
is seeing the dismissal of
beauty on all its levels.
And so thank you for
sharing that perspective
from the animal
and insect kingdom.
Let's go to the notion of
joining together as community.
And you do so in
your Anglican church.
And singing together and
what this does to the body,
because it actually
improves our immune systems.
So let's talk about
chanting and singing.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, this is
something I've learned a lot
about my wife, Jill Purce, who
teaches chanting and singing.
Also, through singing myself.
When we chant or sing together,
we make notes together.
If we're chanting or
singing, we breathe together.
We literally come into
resonance with each other.
And if we're chanting or singing
mantras or standard prayers
or even regular
hymns, there's also
a resonance by what I call
morphic resonance with those
who've done it before.
So it's deeply connecting.
It connects us
with our own bodies
because the words make
our bodies vibrate.
It connects us
with other people,
and it connects us
with a whole tradition
of those who've done it before.
So it overcomes that
terrible isolation
that we fall into if
we cut ourselves off
from nature and from each
other and reconnects us.
>> REGINA: And it's vibrating
inside our brains and inside
our bodies, healing us on a
very vibrational physical level.
>> SHELDRAKE: Literally.
>> REGINA: How many of
us ever sing anymore?
Unless you happen
to hear something
in passing on the radio
that you know the lyrics to.
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
>> REGINA: And I mean, I
really feel this myself.
I stopped singing
for a long time other
than the occasional song.
And I've just been feeling
in the last year or two
that something is really
missing on a vibrational level.
So whether it's chanting,
whether it's spiritual,
whether it's for joy, we
just need to sing again.
And we can't go through
all of the points
because they're in your book
and very well delineated,
but I would like to go to
pilgrimage and the beauty
and value of pilgrimage and your
pilgrimages with your godson.
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, pilgrimage
is very ancient human thing.
All religions have it.
Our hunter gatherer ancestors
moved around the landscape.
They were nomadic.
And pilgrimage is like a residue
of our nomadic tradition.
I think it's deep and archetypal
to go to sacred places,
to reconnect with
those holy places.
The Protestant Reformation
abolished pilgrimage
in northern Europe, and the
settlers of North America
didn't have it because they were
Protestants for the most part.
The ones in South America,
the Catholics, included it.
They just took over the
ancient sacred places
and made them Christian.
So there are massive
pilgrimages in Catholic Central
and South America, for example,
to the shrine of Our Lady
of Guadalupe in Mexico.
So I've been doing this
every year with my godson.
We have a one day pilgrimage.
We walk the last eight
or nine miles towards one
of the great cathedrals of
England, Canterbury, Lincoln,
Wells, and what was
the other one we did?
Oh, Ely.
And this year, probably we're
going to go to Winchester.
>> REGINA: Oh, it's beautiful.
Yes.
>> SHELDRAKE: So we walk
through the countryside,
connecting with the
countryside and each other,
relating to that holy place.
When we get there,
we go with intention.
We light a candle
and say a prayer.
Then we have a cream
tea, which refreshes us.
And then we go to
choral evensong
every day in all our cathedrals
on weekdays, not just Sundays.
There's this beautiful
evening service
in 16th century language sung
by wonderful choirs, called
choral evensong.
So we go to choral
evensong, which
is inspiring, uplifting,
incredibly beautiful.
>> REGINA: Is that in
all Anglican churches?
>> SHELDRAKE: Yes.
In London, Westminster Abbey
and St. Paul's Cathedral
almost every day, 5:00 PM.
>> REGINA: I'll have
to go and hear it.
>> SHELDRAKE: There's a website,
called choralevensong.org,
which I've helped set up.
Which means you can find it
anywhere in Britain or Ireland
any day.
So you can check it out
while you're here in London.
>> REGINA: Yes, I
will check it out.
>> SHELDRAKE: Westminster Abbey.
It's in walking distance.
>> REGINA: Yes, it is.
Any final thoughts?
We only have about
one minute left?
>> SHELDRAKE: Well, the
main thing is that all these
practices that I write
about are open to everyone.
They're inclusive.
And they're not
things where you have
to start by believing or
signing up to something.
They're all based
on experience first.
Practice leading to experience.
And I myself think the
root of all religions
is an experience,
first and foremost.
The doctrines come along later.
But all the great religions
start from direct experience.
Buddha's enlightenment
under a tree;
Jesus' experience of being a
direct connection with God;
Muhammad's experience
of the voice
of God speaking through him.
They all start with experience.
And that, I think,
is the starting point
for all spiritual life.
And I think that by looking
at the spiritual experiences,
which are part of all
religious traditions,
we can reconnect
through our own practice
through these experiences.
And we can then either continue
to do them just individually,
or we can join together
with other people, which is
in itself a spiritual practice.
>> REGINA: Indeed.
There is a part of us that
has this innate connection
to the all, the great mystery,
and when we cut ourselves off
from it, you can't help but
feel just a little bit grayer.
>> SHELDRAKE: Definitely.
And more depressed.
>> REGINA: And a
little more depressed.
And that's been proven.
And your book is helping
people find their way
back to something
that works for them.
It's not dogmatic in any way.
It's finding your way to the
things that work for you,
like singing, and
gratitude, and love,
and appreciation, which
we can all benefit from.
And I thank you so much
for taking time with us
and for having written
this book as well.
>> SHELDRAKE: My pleasure.
Thank you.
>> REGINA: The name of
Rupert's new book is "Science
and Spiritual Practices," which
you can find through all major
booksellers.
Until we meet again, thank you
for joining us here in London.
[THEME MUSIC]